
@chapter Introduction
The idmclib is a compact C library for the numerical analysis of discrete and continuous time dynamical systems.

Apart from the C API, it has bindings for:
@itemize @bullet
@item Java
@item R
@item Python (unmantained)
@end itemize

The library has been written with simplicity in mind. Currently (version 0.8.2)
it has a total of 3197 lines, distributed over 25 header and source files.

The C API is fully documented, while internal details can be deduced from
direct inspection of sources, where more obscure parts are well commented.

Thanks to the open source license, idmclib code can be easily studied
and reused in other projects. The final user can link his own software
to the officially distributed library, as well as take part or all of the sources
and freely adapt them to his needs.

@section History
The first version of DMC was an MS DOS software...

iDmc was developed within a research project financed by the Italian
Ministry of Universities, the Universities of Udine and Ca'Foscari of
Venice, the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region.

In 2004 M. Lines and A. Medio, with the financial support of the Italian
Ministry of Universities, the Universities of Udine and Ca'Foscari of
Venice and the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region, started a new project.
Within this project, DMC was completely rewritten, and renamed iDMC.

In contrast with DMC, iDMC has a modern, cross-platform Graphical User Interface (GUI)
written in Java. Dynamical systems are coded in an easy to learn scripting language, Lua,
so no compilation is necessary for the end user for analysing a new model.
Even if the GUI is written in Java, the computational core is still coded in C.

The iDMC software is easy to use, and produces good quality plots
with very little efforts. However the GUI shell code has become
huge and relatively hard to maintain, with long learning periods
for new developers. In addition, the software contains Java and C code,
so requires (in principle) competence in these two programming languages
at the same time, reducing in practice the set of potential developers.

For these reasons in 2007, financially supported by the University of Udine (Italy),
a cleanup of iDMC was started. All the C sources were extracted and packed in a self-sufficient,
well documented C library.
Currently, iDMC is a pure Java software, while the idmclib library is a plain C library
with bindings to other programming languages.
