@chapter Tutorial

In this chapter, the usage of the idmclib library is illustrated.
A Linux environment is assumed, with a gcc compiler and the pkg-config utility.
However, any *nix system with an ANSI standard compliant C compiler should work equally well.

For Windows users, the MinGW compiler with the MSYS environment can be used.

Note that the idmclib library should be already installed.

@section Getting started
Let's write our first idmclib program: 

@example
@verbatiminclude examples/example1.c
@end example

Save the above lines in a file named `example1.c' and type at the shell prompt:

@example
gcc example1.c -o example1 `pkg-config idmclib --cflags --libs`
@end example

Now you can execute the program:
@example
./example1
model correctly loaded
@end example

That's all!

@section Doing numerical analysis
Once a model is loaded, various analysis can be done on it.
As a full reference, consult the API documentation (@pxref{CAPI, C API}). Here we will present some simple
cases.

@subsection Computing trajectories
In this example we will compute a trajectory for the map
@tex
$ x_{t+1} = p \cdot x_t$
@end tex
@html
x(t+1) = p * x(t)
@end html
.

Consider the following listing:
@example
@verbatiminclude examples/example2.c
@end example

Save it in a file called `example2.c'. Compile with:
@example
gcc example2.c -o example2 `pkg-config idmclib --cflags --libs`
@end example

and run:
@example
./example2
step 1: 0.500000
step 2: 0.250000
step 3: 0.125000
step 4: 0.062500
@end example

@c @subsection Finding periodic cycles

@c @subsection Computing Lyapunov exponents

@c @section Managing syntax errors

@section Managing runtime errors
@example
@verbatiminclude examples/ex_error.c
@end example

Save in `ex_error.c' and compile as usual:
@example
gcc ex_error.c -o ex_error `pkg-config idmclib --cflags --libs`
@end example

Now run the executable:
@example
./ex_error
runtime error: 7: attempt to perform arithmetic on a string value
@end example

Note that a reference to the line number which caused the error is reported.
